Title: VIRGi: View-dependent Instant Recoloring of 3D Gaussians Splats

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.02986v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 02:26:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> 1

# VIRGi: View-dependent Instant Recoloring of 3D Gaussians Splats 

Alessio Mazzucchelli, Ivan Ojeda-Martin, Fernando Rivas-Manzaneque, Elena Garces, Adrian Penate-Sanchez, Francesc Moreno-Noguer 

Abstract —3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently trans-formed the fields of novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction due to its ability to accurately model complex 3D scenes and its unprecedented rendering performance. However, a significant challenge persists: the absence of an efficient and photorealistic method for editing the appearance of the scene’s content. In this paper we introduce VIRGi, a novel approach for rapidly editing the color of scenes modeled by 3DGS while preserving view-dependent effects such as specular highlights. Key to our method are a novel architecture that separates color into diffuse and view-dependent components, and a multi-view training strategy that integrates image patches from multiple viewpoints. Improving over the conventional single-view batch training, our 3DGS representation provides more accurate reconstruction and serves as a solid representation for the recoloring task. For 3DGS recoloring, we then introduce a rapid scheme requiring only one manually edited image of the scene from the end-user. By fine-tuning the weights of a single MLP, alongside a module for single-shot segmentation of the editable area, the color edits are seamlessly propagated to the entire scene in just two seconds, facilitating real-time interaction and providing control over the strength of the view-dependent effects. An exhaustive validation on diverse datasets demonstrates significant quantitative and qualitative advancements over competitors based on Neural Radiance Fields representations. 

Index Terms —Neural Radiance Fields, 3D Gaussian Splatting, Recoloring, Editing, Multi-view Consistency 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1] has recently established itself as a dominant technique in the fields of 3D recon-struction and image-based rendering. By employing a large set of anisotropic Gaussians to represent scenes, 3DGS fa-cilitates rapid reconstruction and rendering processes, effec-tively preserving fine details and complex lighting effects. Compared to previous neural rendering methodologies such as NeRFs [2], 3DGS demonstrates markedly superior efficiency 

A. Mazzucchelli is with Arquimea Research Center, San Crist´ obal de la Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 38320 and Universidad Polit´ ecnica de Catalunya, Doctoral Degree in Automatic Control, Robotics and Vision, Carrer de Jordi Girona, 31, Les Corts, Barcelona, 08034, Spain. I. Ojeda-Martin is with Arquimea Research Center, San Crist´ obal de la Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 38320. F. Rivas-Manzaneque is with Volinga AI, San Crist´ obal de la Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 38320 and Universidad Polit´ ecnica de Madrid, Programa de Doctorado en Autom´ atica y Rob´ otica, Calle de Jos´ e Guti´ errez Abascal 2, Madrid, 28006, Spain. E. Garces is with Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, C/Tulip´ an S/N, 28933 M´ ostoles (Madrid), Spain A. Penate-Sanchez is with IUSANI, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, C/ Juan de Quesada 30, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35001, Spain. F. Moreno-Noguer is with Institut de Rob` otica i Inform` atica Industrial (IRI), CSIC-UPC, C/ Llorens i Artigas 4, Barcelona, 08028, Spain. 

in both reconstruction and rendering. 3DGS has application in various downstream tasks, including 3D scene/object manip-ulation [3]–[5], instruction-based editing [6], [7], drag-based editing [8], multi-object interaction [9] and style transfer [10], [11]. However, unlike NeRFs, which has been extensively studied for its recoloring capabilities [12]–[16], the recoloring problem has received little attention in the context of 3DGS. In this paper we introduce VIRGi, the first approach for photorealistic appearance editing of scenes modeled with 3DGS. Our approach is highly efficient and user friendly. Given a scene modeled with 3DGS, the user simply provides color edits in a single view. These edits are then rapidly propagated throughout the entire scene and viewpoints within approximately two seconds. This, combined with the inher-ent rendering efficiency of 3DGS, enables a quasi-real-time interactive editing experience. Our solution is built upon two primary components. First, we present a novel architecture and training scheme tailored for accurately modeling viewpoint dependencies. Traditional 3DGS systems [1] are trained on a per-view basis, with train-ing batches composed of image tiles from a single viewpoint. In our approach we implement multi-view training by modify-ing the CUDA implementation of the rasterizer, enabling the use of different viewpoints in the same training batch. This approach, as we will show later, facilitates the decomposition of reflections into diffuse and view-dependent components (e.g. specularities), encapsulated in two independent MLPs. The second component of our approach is a pipeline for efficient scene recoloring. Given a target view with the desired color edition, we propose a strategy where we only fine-tune the last layer of the diffuse MLP, in conjunction with a module designed to perform soft segmentation of the edited region. This optimization ensures the consistent propagation of color edits throughout the entire scene, preserving view-dependent effects and preventing artifacts such as color bleeding com-monly observed in other approaches. Since this process op-erates at interactive rates, users can recursively provide new edited images if required. We validate our recoloring method across multiple datasets and conduct a comparative analysis with previous NeRF-based methodologies. VIRGi consistently outperforms these approaches not only in efficiency and inter-activity but also in quality. We demonstrate that our decoupled diffuse/view-dependent color modeling enables the creation of highly photorealistic color editions, while also empowering the user to control specular effects, such as the strength of the highlights. Fig. 1, and the supplementary video showcase examples of the results achieved with our method, consistently 

> arXiv:2603.02986v1 [cs.CV] 3 Mar 2026 2

Original image Recolor Multi-recolor Novel view Diffuse Specular 

Fig. 1: VIRGi enables – by editing a single view – instant recolorings of one or multiple objects in scenes modeled with 3D Gaussian Splats. Our key idea of decomposing the reflectance of the scene into diffuse and specular components allows view-dependent consistent edits. Our separation can also be used to enhance or reduce material specularity. surpassing competing approaches as demonstrated in Fig. 2. To summarize, we provide the following contributions:  

> •

The first method for conducting photorealistic, view-dependent, and interactive color edits for scenes modeled with Gaussian Splats. Our approach is designed to be user-friendly and interactive, requiring only a single color edit from one view to recolor the entire scene.  

> •

A novel neural network architecture for 3DGS that learns the decoupling of color into its specular and diffuse components. This architecture enables precise color editing of scenes while preserving their view-dependent effects.  

> •

A multi-view training strategy that is essential to learning the diffuse/specular color components. Incorporating infor-mation from different viewpoints during training enhances not only the learning of the decomposed output in our novel architecture, but also the overall performance of the 3DGS reconstruction. II. R ELATED WORK 

3D Gaussian Splatting [1] provides real-time rendering with simpler manipulation compared to Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [2] because of its explicit scene representation. How-ever, globally editing 3DGS scenes remains an open problem, as we discuss in this section. 

Point and 3DGS Rendering. Gaussian Splats originate from point-cloud representations [17]. These techniques became very popular in 3D modeling [18], [19] and as the basis for image-based rendering techniques [20]–[24]. In recent years, Gaussian Splats [1] have surpassed previous point-based rendering methods by enabling real-time novel view synthesis for scenes of varying complexity. These scenes range from those with simple Lambertian materials to those with intricate light interactions, dynamic elements [9], [25]–[30], physical simulators [9], and avatars [31]–[39]. Many works have already addressed the memory and stor-age limitations of 3DGS, leading to efficient compression strategies that now allow deployment even on lightweight devices [40]. In particular, vector clustering and quantization-based methods have proven effective in minimizing parameter counts [41]–[44]. Notably, [45] employ vector quantization to construct codebooks. However, unlike other methods, their approach explicitly separates color information from geometry. A major drawback that remains to be addressed, and which we tackle in this paper, is the constraint of performing the optimization step over a single image. Unlike NeRF, where rays from different viewpoints can be sampled with minimal overhead, the 3DGS rasterization pipeline is inherently built around a single image. In this work, we adopt the represen-tation from [45] and extend it by augmenting the CUDA rasterizer so that optimization can be done from multiple images in a single step. 

Inverse Rendering in Radiance Fields. NeRF-based ap-proaches have incorporated surface normals and separated diffuse/specular components to improve reflectance modeling and enable scene relighting, as demonstrated in [46], [47]. Other works [48]–[50] jointly optimize geometry, materials, and illumination, leveraging physics-based priors or path trac-ing with near-field indirect light to better disentangle reflective properties from environmental lighting. In the domain of 3D Gaussian Splatting, inverse rendering has been enhanced by estimating normals, materials, and indirect lighting for each Gaussian primitive [51]. To better handle ambiguities between surface normals and roughness, a segmentation prior is intro-duced in [52], guiding geometry and material decomposition. Normals are estimated from the shape of each Gaussian in [53], where directional masking enforces orientation, en-abling BRDF rendering and disentangling indirect light via voxel-based tracing. A dedicated specular shading is proposed in [54] to refine surface normals and enhance high-frequency reflections without compromising splatting efficiency. 

Color Editing. Color editing through edit propagation strate-gies utilizes local color cues, such as user-defined scribbles or points, to influence similar regions within the image. Previous works in this domain employed propagation rules based on color similarity metrics [55]–[58]. However, defining effective metrics that capture both local and non-local image features posed a challenge. To address this, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) proved successful for robust fea-ture extraction [59], [60]. A different approach involves pre-computed palettes representing dominant colors in an image. These palettes serve as a basis for describing other colors through linear combinations. Some artists prefer this method for its control over global and local color modifications, often combining it with object segmentation techniques [61]–[63]. 3

Fig. 2: Comparison of recoloring methods with a ground truth recolor. Our method VIRGi is the first one to propose a solution for 3DGS recoloring, outperforming one of the best methods in NeRFs recoloring [15] (IReNe). We propose several contributions that make our method robust and better than a baseline (V ANILLA -VIRGi) obtained by na¨ ıvely combining existing methods. In this work, we propose a method that can leverage any of these paradigms to transition from a 2D to a full 3D edit. Our method allows users to edit a single 2D image using their preferred editing tool or technique. Thanks to our efficient propagation strategy, any 2D recoloring is extrapolated to a 3DGS-based representation. 

Radiance Fields Color Editing. Despite their brief existence, Gaussian Splats have sparked rapid development, with various manipulation techniques emerging. Text prompts are used to modify static scenes [6], [64], [65] or dynamic ones [66], [67]. Additionally, [68] enable object selection, while [69] create articulated Gaussian Splats from dynamic sequences. [5] propose diverse edits, such as semantic segmentation, object segmentation, or text-based editing, through feature distillation. Unlike for NeRFs [12]–[14], [16], to the best of our knowledge, there is no specific work for Gaussian Splat recoloring. Our work draws inspiration from [15], who, by fine-tuning part of the NeRF, achieved remarkable quality and view-dependent instant recoloring. However, as we will demonstrate in the experimental section, our method, which incorporates multi-view training and explicit diffuse/specular modeling, significantly enhances the quality compared to [15]. III. B ACKGROUND AND VANILLA -VIRG I

We ground our approach on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1], particulary focusing on Compact 3D Gaussian Splatting (C3DGS) [45]. 3DGS represents the radiance field by generating a collection of 3D Gaussians, each incorporating spherical harmonics information. During the rendering pro-cess, these Gaussians are splatted onto a 2D plane to produce the 2D image [70]. However, a notable limitation of 3DGS is its significant memory requirement, averaging 746 MB for the Mip-NeRF dataset [71]. To address this challenge, C3DGS introduced two solutions: encoding the Gaussians using a codebook to conserve memory, and a key contribution for our purposes, utilizing a hashgrid and an MLP to encode appearance information. Their latter contribution eliminates the necessity to store spherical harmonics coefficients for each Gaussian, thereby reducing the memory footprint by a factor of 15. Consequently, the memory requirements decrease substantially to an average of 48.8 MB on Mip-NeRF dataset. Our proposed approach adapts the recoloring strategy for NeRFs from IReNe [15], one of the top-performing methods in this domain. IReNe takes as input a single recolored view of the NeRF and propagates the edits to the entire NeRF using a strategy based on fine-tuning part of the color MLPs, selecting the neurons responsible for view-dependent effects, and performing soft segmentation in 3D space. We leverage some of these concepts and tailor them to suit C3DGS. 

A. VANILLA -VIRGi Given the differing radiance field representations between NeRFs and 3DGS, combining both strategies presents chal-lenges. Our initial idea, dubbed V ANILLA -VIRGi, attempted to integrate the MLP configuration and hashgrid features from C3DGS, along with the last layer and soft-segmentation blending from IReNe in a straightforward manner. Specifically, VANILLA -VIRGi utilizes a single neural network to estimate the color C of each Gaussian, following the formulation proposed in [45], expressed as: C = MLP c(f , θ |ϕc ), (1) 43D  Gaussians   

> Image
> edited
> by user
> MLP seg
> Cspec
> Cdiff
> C’ diff
> Alpha
> blending
> Recolored scene
> R
> G
> B
> G
> B
> R
> C’’ diff
> MLP diff
> Hashgrid

Multi -view  Training 

(Section  4.2)         

> Trained before color edition Trained during color edition Dense connections :

Editing  (Section  4.3) 

> C’
> hdiff
> MLP spec
> R
> G
> B

Diffuse /Specular  Decomposition  (Section  4.1)  

> Input images
> C

Fig. 3: Overview of VIRGi. Our method comprises two main steps. In the initial step, we train a 3DGS architecture consisting of a Hashgrid f representing the geometry and two MLPs for color modeling. We separate the observed color into a diffuse term MLP diff , which solely relies on hashgrid features f , and a specular term MLP spec , which incorporates the view direction 

θ. Our training strategy involves leveraging multiple views of the same scene point in a single batch, as opposed to using a single image per batch, resulting in improved PSNR compared to previous methods. In the second step, given an edited 2D image, we fine-tune the last layer of the diffuse MLP using a soft-segmentation mask α to achieve the target color. where f are the hashgrid features, θ denotes the view direction, and ϕc are the weights of the MLP. Then, following the approach outlined in IReNe [15], V ANILLA -VIRGi modifies only the last layer of MLP c when an edit is performed, resulting in a new color: C′ = MLP c(f , θ |ϕlast c ). (2) C′ is blended with the original to produce the final color C ′′ :C′′ = αC′ + (1 − α)C. (3) Blending is performed as α = MLP seg (f ), which is a soft segmentation of the edited region and is learned by an MLP from the hashgrid space features. Additionally, this approach incorporates a view-dependent neuron selection strategy within the last layer of MLP c. For further details, we encourage readers to refer to the original paper [15]. However, as depicted in Figure 2, this straightforward ap-proach does not yield optimal results, as traces of the previous color persist in the rendering of novel views. This outcome is somewhat expected, as this method lacks mechanisms to enforce multi-view consistency, leading to the entanglement of view-dependent effects such as specular highlights within the color MLP c.Our proposed solution, VIRGi, aims to establish a clear separation between diffuse and view-dependent (specular) effects [13], [72], [73] from the initial construction of the Gaussian Splats. We introduce two pivotal concepts detailed in the following section: Firstly, a decoupled diffuse-specular color estimation through distinct MLPs; and secondly, a multi-view training strategy that leverages the principle that the diffuse color of an object with isotropic reflectance remains invariant to view changes [74]. IV. M ETHOD 

Figure 3 provides an overview of our method, which operates in two main steps. First, we initiate the process by constructing a compact 3D scene representation [45] from a collection of multi-view images. This learned representation comprises two primary components: (i) a set of hashgrid features f , which capture the geometric details of the scene, and (ii) a pair of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) responsible for encoding the scene’s appearance. Unlike C3DGS, we employ separate MLPs, MLP diff and MLP spec , to model diffuse color C diff and specular C spec reflections, respectively. The architecture of this decoupling is explained in Section IV-A. To train our 3DGS, we employ a novel optimized multi-view training strategy, detailed in Section IV-B, that implicitly en-courages corresponding 3D points to occupy nearby locations within the neural feature space. This novel approach, unlike conventional training with single images per batch [1], [45], captures more consistent and better reflections, as demon-strated in the experiments section. Once the original scene is learned, users can utilize any existing tool to recolor one view of the scene I edit . Subsequently, our optimized fine-tuning process, described in Section IV-C, ensures that the color edits are consistently propagated throughout the entire scene at interactive rates. 5

Original image Monoview Multiview 

Fig. 4: Specularity Comparison: Monoview vs. Multiview. 

Training with a single viewpoint poses challenges in learning specularities due to limited sample diversity, multiview train-ing facilitates an easier understanding of specular effects. 

A. Diffuse/Specular Decomposition Architecture 

Separating diffuse C diff and view-dependent color C spec (or specular) in independent MLPs [13], [15] is essential for ensuring view-dependent consistency in the edits. This sep-aration reflects the underlying assumption that object color is primarily captured by the diffuse component which is reasonable for many common scenarios. To model the view dependency, MLP diff only utilizes the hashgrid features f , whereas MLP spec incorporates both the hashgrid features and the view direction θ. The outputs of these components are combined using a sigmoid function σ(·),expressed formally as: Cdiff = MLP diff (f |ϕdf ) (4) Cspec = MLP spec (f , θ |ϕsp , ϕ df ) (5) C = σ(Cdiff + Cspec ) (6) where ϕsp and ϕdf denote the specular and diffuse weights of the MLPs, respectively, and C represents the RGB color of the Gaussian. The standard architecture of MLP spec and MLP diff consists of three fully-connected layers. However, we found it necessary to introduce additional residual connections between them. Specifically, we connected the first layer of MLP diff to the sec-ond layer of MLP spec , and the second layer of MLP diff to the third layer of MLP spec . These connections are unidirectional, allowing only MLP spec to access the content of MLP diff .The rationale behind this architecture is as follows: while MLP spec theoretically accounts for all view-dependent re-flectance (since it receives θ as input), MLP diff should focus solely on learning what is view-point invariant. Without these connections, the specular component tends to be noisier, making it challenging to learn an accurate reflection. With the added connections, the specular component gains a better understanding of which aspects of the reflection to prioritize. To train the pair of MLPs we use the following loss function: 

L = ∥C − Iedit ∥1 + λspec ∥Cspec ∥22 (7) This loss function uses an L1 photometric loss with a smooth-ness term on the specular component. The value of λspec grad-ually decreases from 0.25 to 0.05 during training. Initially, this penalty encourages the network to prioritize explaining color variations using the diffuse component (C diff ) alone. Since the diffuse MLP (MLP diff ) lacks view direction information, it cannot effectively capture view-dependent effects. As training progresses, we reduce the penalty on MLP spec to allow the network to also account for the view-dependent part. 

B. Multi-view Training 

An essential aspect of our method is the multi-view training strategy. Unlike existing approaches in Gaussian Splats [1], [45], which utilize one image per batch, our method samples multiple views simultaneously. This strategy offers two key advantages. Firstly, it encourages points in the 3D world with similar reflectance properties to be close together in the feature space, thereby aiding convergence and enhancing overall quality. Secondly, it assists in implicitly decomposing the reflection into diffuse and specular components, which proves advantageous for the recoloring task. We adapted the CUDA implementation of the fast rasterizer to use tiles from different images within the same training step. Additionally, to expedite training time without altering the geometry during recoloring, we initialize the 3D Gaussians using C3DGS and freeze them. This ensures interactivity, enabling faster operations as there’s no need to recompute the gaussian ordering for alpha blending during rasterization. With the precomputed ordering, we create mini-batches composed of five tiles from different images, where the same gaussian is observed from diverse viewpoints. The training batch is comprised of as many 5-sample mini-batches as can be ac-commodated within the GPU’s VRAM. As we demonstrate in the experimental section, this modifica-tion alone significantly enhances the default rendering quality of different baselines (see Table III). Additionally, multi-view training is essential for effectively learning a robust decompo-sition of both diffuse and view-dependent components. In the original 3DGS approach, training is conducted using a single image per batch, meaning each Gaussian is updated based on this singular viewpoint. However, by including five samples of each Gaussian within the same training batch, the update process endeavors to account for all these viewpoints simulta-neously. This aids the MLP diff in discerning the shared color aspects (diffuse) and the viewpoint-dependent characteristics (specular) among these five tiles. In Fig. 4, we provide two examples where the benefits of utilizing multi-view training for learning the specular components are evident. 

C. Editing 

The recoloring process involves the user modifying a desig-nated target view I edit , followed by fine-tuning a portion of the architecture to accommodate the desired changes. Drawing from [15], we implement last-layer adaptation on the diffuse component (as per Equation 2) and soft-segmentation (as per Equation 3). We update the weights ϕ′ 

> df

of the last layer of MLP diff to derive a new diffuse color C ′

> diff

. This new color is then alpha-blended with C diff using the soft-segmentation mask, denoted as α, resulting in the final diffuse color denoted C ′′ 

> diff

. It’s worth noting that our method differs in the way the soft-segmentation mask is obtained compared to [15]. In our approach, we establish a connection between the 6                                                        

> Mip NeRF 360 [71] LLFF [75] NeRF Synthetic [2] Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> PaletteNeRF 22.24 0.720 0.278 24.19 0.800 0.187 29.92 0.960 0.038 RecolorNeRF ---24.52 0.736 0.333 29.00 0.943 0.048 IReNe 26.80 0.714 0.292 26.51 0.823 0.136 30.33 0.959 0.035 VANILLA -VIRGi 29.19 0.881 0.150 28.01 0.905 0.129 32.13 0.975 0.023
> VIRGi 29.74 0.886 0.146 29.10 0.915 0.119 31.65 0.971 0.027

TABLE I: Quantitative color edition results. Best , Second. Results using the recolored ground truth images from [15].                                      

> Mip NeRF 360 LLFF NeRF Synthetic DC MV DS PSNR ↑PSNR ↑PSNR ↑
> ✗✗✗29.19 28.01 32.13
> ✗✓✗29.45 28.54 31.90
> ✗✓✓29.56 28.62 31.78
> ✓✗✗28.58 27.66 30.93
> ✓✓✗29.61 29.15 31.50
> ✓✓✓29.74 29.10 31.65

TABLE II: Ablation study. Recoloring results on all datasets of our ablated method . Best , Second. DC indicates if the output is decoupled or not. MV indicates if the model has been trained using our multi-view rasterization DS indicates if the diffuse’s net-work MLP diff output has been introduced into the soft segmentation network MLP seg .

activations of last layer of the diffuse MLP, denoted as hdiff ,and the segmentation MLP. This integration aims to introduce additional contextual information to improve the quality of segmentation. As demonstrated in the experiments section, this enhancement contributes to the overall performance of our approach. 

α = MLP seg (f , hdiff ), (8) C′ 

> diff

= MLP diff (f |ϕ′ 

> df

), (9) C′′  

> diff

= αC′ 

> diff

+ (1 − α)Cdiff , (10) C′ = σ(C′′  

> diff

+ Cspec ) (11) Upon receiving the user’s edit, we fine-tune the color and segmentation MLPs (MLP diff , MLP spec , and MLP seg ) to accommodate the desired changes with the following loss function: 

L = ∥C′ − Iedit ∥1 (12) This loss function uses an L1 photometric loss between the rendered recolored version C ′ and the user’s edit I edit .V. R ESULTS 

A. Quantitative results 

Comparison with state-of-the-art. In Table I, we present the results of recoloring on the dataset provided by [15], which includes manually recolored scenes using photoshop in LLFF [75], MipNeRF-360 [71], and recolored scenes from Synthetic NeRF [2] using Blender. The original code from [1] did not converge in the flower and leafs scenes from LLFF, so those scenes were not evaluated for any of the re-ported methods. We compare our results against several recent baselines, including PaletteNeRF [13], RecolorNeRF [12], and IReNe [15]. We provide results from our proposed method, VIRGi, as well as from the V ANILLA -VIRGi. In Fig. 8 some qualitative results from the dataset can be seen. The evaluation                

> Dataset (PSNR ↑)Mip NeRF 360 LLFF NeRF Synthetic Mono-view C3DGS 28.96 25.63 35.60 Multi-view C3DGS 29.47 25.87 35.84
> Mono-view VIRGi 28.43 25.73 33.87 Multi-view VIRGi 29.30 25.97 35.76

TABLE III: Multi-View VS Mono-View novel view synthe-sis . Training both the original C3DGS as well as VIRGi using the proposed multi-view approach enhances the novel view synthesis results. We underline that VIRGi also provides a decomposition of the image into diffuse and specular. metrics employed are standard radiance field metrics (PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS), and the split between training and testing, as well as the recoloring editions, follows the protocol estab-lished in [15]. Importantly, VIRGi demonstrates a notable and consistent improvement over other radiance field recoloring methods, underscoring its efficacy and robustness. 

Method robustness. The dataset provided by [15] contains 11 distinct recolored images for each scene in the MipNeRF-360 and LLFF datasets. To demonstrate the robustness of our approach to variations in the input image, we conducted 11 evaluations for each scene, each time using a different recolored ground-truth image as input. This methodology allows us to assess that the quality of our method remains consistent regardless of the specific input image chosen by the user for editing. The average recoloring PSNR for 11 iterations when modifying the edited image for VIRGi was (MipNeRF-360: 29 .27 , LLFF: 28 .87 ), while for V ANILLA -VIRGi it was (MipNeRF-360: 28 .71 , LLFF: 27 .91 ). Remarkably, the aver-age performance in both cases closely aligns with the standard experiment in Table I, using the images defined by [15] as the input image. 

Ablation study. We analyze the individual contribution of each component with two ablation experiments. The first experiment (Table II), analyzes the impact of the decoupled output ( DC ), the multi-view rasterization ( MV ), and the in-tegration of diffuse neuron activation into the segmentation network ( DS ). Notably, our method VIRGi emerges as the best-performing recoloring method overall. Adding multi-view information ( MV ) consistently enhances performance across all configurations. Moreover, the decoupled architec-ture ( DC ) demonstrates superior results with the utilization of multi-view. Remarkably, when multi-view is employed, the decoupled results consistently outperform the original non-decoupled color estimation. Additionally, inputting the diffuse neuron activations to the segmentation ( DS ) boosts performance in all cases except for a singular instance in the LLFF dataset. This outcome is reasonable, as the LLFF dataset comprises frontal recordings with limited viewpoint 7

Fig. 5: Comparison between VIRGi (upper row per case) and Gaussian Editor [68] (bottom row per case). Gaussian Editor requires the user to initialize a mask using SAM [76] before applying color edits based on provided prompts: “kitchen - make it magenta”, “bicycle - make it yellow”, and “bonsai - make it green”. Gaussian Editor exhibits several drawbacks, such as color bleeding into surrounding areas in the first two scenes and not understanding the scene structure when recoloring the third scene. Notably, Gaussian Editor takes an average of 612 seconds to process these scenes, while VIRGi completes the task in just 2 seconds on average. changes, thereby posing challenges in understanding diffuse and specular aspects of the scene. In our second ablation experiment (Table III), we demonstrate how multiview optimization not only enhances the quality of the recoloring but also inherently improves the modeling of view-dependent effects in 3DGS. Specifically, we compare the reconstruction accuracy (without recoloring) of the original C3DGS [45] trained with and without multiview, and apply the same procedure to evaluate VIRGi. Notably, multiview consistently yields performance improvements across all cases. Furthermore, this experiment confirms that the proposed mod-ifications to C3DGS [45] for color editing do not lead to any noticeable reduction in the original quality. 

B. Qualitative results 

Fig. 7 showcases qualitative results obtained from the MipNeRF-360 dataset [71]. This dataset features complex real scenes with complete 360° coverage. The edits produced by VIRGi demonstrate consistency across viewpoints and 

Fig. 6: Illumination editing with decoupled output. Top row: specular component reduced by applying a multiplicative factor of 0. Bottom row: specular component increased by applying a factor of 1.5.effectively capture the intricate view-dependent effects present in the scenes. Additionally, the 3D segmentation masks for each recolored region, estimated by our method, are presented, further illustrating its capability to achieve 3D consistency. 

Comparison with Gaussian Editor. As discussed in Sect. II, no other method specifically addresses the challenge of per-forming appearance edition on Gaussian Splatting. However, some methods enable the modification of the final color of specific elements using text prompts. Fig. 5 presents a qualitative comparison of VIRGi and GaussianEditor [68]. GaussianEditor facilitates single-element recoloring by lever-aging SAM [76] to generate a mask of the desired object. Subsequently, guided by a text prompt and employing Instruct-Pix2Pix [77], the scene edit is optimized until satisfactory re-sults are achieved. As shown, our method is more consistently more robust. Notably, GaussianEditor exhibits color bleeding into undesired areas of the scene, a limitation not observed in VIRGi’s results. Additionally, while GaussianEditor requires approximately 10 minutes to complete a given edit, our approach achieves the same task in just 2 seconds, significantly enhancing its interactivity and usability. 

Specular editing. In Fig. 6, we illustrate how decoupling the color output into diffuse and specular components enables fine adjustments to view-dependent effects. By manipulating the strength of the specular component C spec , we can make subtle changes in the material appearance. Although the range of editions is limited, this experiment provides valuable insights into our model’s understanding of scene appearance, a key aspect of its superiority over other recoloring methods. 

C. Limitations 

While our approach excels in handling a wide range of color editing tasks, it has several limitations. First, our current material model with diffuse/specular separation is very simple, thus, more complex materials with transparency, anisotropy, or with colored reflections are not captured by the proposed representation. In Fig. 9, first and second rows, we show two examples of our decomposition. In the scene named as Kitchen 

(first row, the one with the Lego), the result appears more coherent and smooth, successfully separating reflections from the table and the top of the tractor wheels. While the Kitchen 8

scene handles reflections reasonably well, we observe that the decomposition breaks down in more complex cases, such as the mirror-like surfaces in the Counter scene (second row). As discussed previously, the goal of our decomposition is not physical accuracy but editability: specifically, enabling stable and multiview-consistent recoloring without degrading the final render. This is precisely why we introduced the separation of MLPs in our design: to ensure that recoloring operations target only the components unaffected by view direction, maintaining consistency across novel views. To show what our method would yield as a result in such failure cases, we have performed in Fig 9 some examples where we try to edit a transparent object, the water filter jug, and an object with a mirror-like surface, the bowl. In both cases our approach edits parts of the scene that it should not modify, generating a bleeding out of the color edit into other objects. Another limitation is that in certain cases a single edited view does not have enough information to segment the scene perfectly. This happens mainly in cases in which some parts of the scene, that were not present in the original edited image, are fairly similar to parts of the desired edition. Luckily, due to our method being interactive this can be easily fixed by adding a second edited image, as we show in the supplementary video. We show examples of wrong recoloring cases in Fig. 10. In those cases we show how we tried to solve the issues by adding a second edited image. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

We have presented a novel method that, by disentangling the color components and integrating multiview information during training, achieves high-quality in color editing for 3DGS. This represents a significant advancement, marking the first instance of a Gaussian splatting editing technique capable of generating recolored models of superior quality. Moreover, our method operates with remarkable speed ( ∼2 seconds), rendering it highly suitable for interactive use by virtual production engineers or game designers seeking to efficiently edit assets. As future work, we aim to explore more complex materials and appearances, such as extending to specular color editing. Furthermore, investigating the minimum number of views required to ensure consistent representations while reducing memory consumption for complex edits is another promising direction. 9

Original image Ground truth recolor VIRGi segmentation VIRGi edition VIRGi segmentation VIRGi edition 

Fig. 7: Qualitative results. Results on all scenes from the MipNeRF-360 dataset [71]. This dataset shows complex real scenes with a complete 360 rotation on all scenes. We show several examples of single and multiple color editions. The first column is the original image. The second column is the edit performed by the user and used to train VIRGi. We also show the soft segmentation predicted by VIRGi for each recolored image. 10 

1. Unedited GT 2. Edited GT 3. IReNe 4. VIRGi 

Fig. 8: Some qualitative results of the IReNe [15] dataset. 11       

> Ground Truth VIRGi Diffuse VIRGi Specular VIRGi Combined RGB
> Ground Truth Edit VIRGi Edited pose render VIRGi Novel View render

Fig. 9: Limitations of diffuse/specular modeling. First row Kitchen scene, second row Counter scene. Comparison between Ground Truth, Diffuse, Specular and Combined RGB render. Our simple diffuse/specular model struggles with complex or anisotropic materials. This can be seen in the Counter (bottom) scene, while the Kitchen (top) scene, especially the table, shows better results. Still, both yield solid RGB reconstructions. Third row - Fourth Row: Comparison of original, edited, and rendered views on specular failure cases. In the case of the water jug, although we are able to apply the recoloring, the result lacks uniformity: some areas of the jug appear more red than others, and the color bleeds onto objects visible through the jug’s transparent surface. For the reflective bowl, we manage to change its color as well, but the edits are less clean compared to those on non-reflective, opaque objects. Some regions of the bowl retain the original color, with only a slight green tint appearing in the edited output 12 

Fig. 10: Limitations in segmentation. We show examples where issues in recoloring happened. These cases occur mainly with parts of the scene that were not present in the first edited image. In the first example, the notebook has been incorrectly recolored. In the second example, the palm tree has been incorrectly recolored. In the third example, the legs of the table have not been fully recolored to red. These cases were fixed by adding a second edited image. In most cases, such issues can be solved by adding an additional edited image, but in some cases, like the last example, certain edits cannot be achieved. In this particular case, the curtain is far from the camera, and not much viewpoint change is present in the dataset from which to learn the correct model. 13 

Alessio Mazzucchelli received the B.S. degree and the M.S. degree in computer engineering at Po-litecnico di Milano. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at Universitat Polit` ecnica de Catalunya while developing its research at Arquimea Research Center. His research is mainly focused on editing implicit and explicit 3d representation. 

Ivan Ojeda-Martin received the B.S. degree in computer engineering at Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria. He is currently developing research at Arquimea Research Center. 

Fernando Rivas-Manzaneque received the B.S. degree and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering at Carlos III University of Madrid. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Technical University of Madrid while developing its research at Volinga AI. His research is mainly focused on neural fields and his research interests include neural rendering, scene reconstruction, and image processing. 

Elena Garces is a Senior Research Scientist at Adobe Paris since June 2024. Before that, she was Juan de la Cierva Fellow at the MSLab of the URJC and a Director at SEDDI (Madrid) where she led a technology area with expertise in render, optical capture, and AI. During 2016-2018, she was a Post-doctoral researcher at Technicolor R&D (France). She completed her Ph.D. in 2016 in the Graphics and Imaging Lab of the University of Zaragoza (Spain). During her Ph.D. she had the opportunity to intern twice at Adobe Research (San Jose and Seattle, US). She proudly received the 2017 Premio de Investigaci´ on de la Sociedad Cient´ ıfica Inform´ atica de Espa˜ na y Fundaci´ on BBVA. Press coverage: FBBVA, Innova Spain, El Pa´ ıs, El Mundo El Espa˜ nol. Her research interests span the fields of computer graphics, computer vision, and applied machine learning. In particular, I currently work on digitization (optics&physics) of fabric materials, machine learning-based simulations of garments, and 3D scene reconstruction. 

Adri´ an Penate-Sanchez (PhD) received his PhD from the CSIC-UPC robotics lab (Institut de Rob` otica i Inform` atica Industrial) in Barcelona un-der the supervision of Juan Andrade Cetto and Francesc Moreno Noguer. In 2014, he joined the Computer Vision group at Toshiba’s Cambridge Re-search Laboratory for a 5 month internship. From Nov 2015 till February of 2018 he was a Post-doctoral Research Associate at University College London (UCL) working in the fields of 3D computer vision and machine learning. In March of 2018 he joined the University of Oxford as a Postdoctoral Research Associate working to find solutions to robot navigation in unstructured environments like forests. In 2020 he joined the University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria as a Distinguished Researcher and Lecturer under a Beatriz Galindo grant. 

Francesc Moreno-Noguer is a Research Scientist of the Spanish National Research Council at the Institut de Robotica i Informatica Industrial. His re-search interests are in Computer Vision and Machine Learning, with topics including human shape and motion estimation, 3D reconstruction of rigid and nonrigid objects and camera calibration. He received the Polytechnic University of Catalonia’s Doctoral Dissertation Extraordinary Award, several best paper awards (e.g. ECCV 2018 Honorable mention, ICCV 2017 workshop in Fashion, Intl. Conf. on Machine Vision applications 2016), outstanding reviewer awards at ECCV 2012 and CVPR 2014, 2021, and Google and Amazon Faculty Research Awards in 2017 and 2019, respectively. He has (co)authored over 150 publications in refereed journals and conferences (including 10 IEEE Transactions on PAMI, 5 Intl. Journal of Computer Vision, 28 CVPR, 11 ECCV and 9 ICCV) 

REFERENCES [1] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨ uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 42, no. 4, July 2023. [Online]. Available: https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/ [2] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. [3] Y. Wang, Q. Wu, G. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Gscream: Learning 3d geometry and feature consistent gaussian splatting for object removal,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13679 , 2024. [4] A. Gu´ edon and V. Lepetit, “Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruction and high-quality mesh rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 5354–5363. [5] S. Zhou, H. Chang, S. Jiang, Z. Fan, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, P. Chari, S. You, Z. Wang, and A. Kadambi, “Feature 3dgs: Supercharging 3d gaussian splatting to enable distilled feature fields,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [6] J. Fang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Xie, and Q. Tian, “Gaussianeditor: Editing 3d gaussians delicately with text instructions,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [7] J. Wu, J.-W. Bian, X. Li, G. Wang, I. Reid, P. Torr, and V. Prisacariu, “GaussCtrl: Multi-View Consistent Text-Driven 3D Gaussian Splatting Editing,” ECCV , 2024. [8] S. Shen, J. Xu, Y. Yuan, X. Yang, Q. Shen, and X. Wang, “Draggaussian: Enabling drag-style manipulation on 3d gaussian representation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05800 , 2024. [9] T. Xie, Z. Zong, Y. Qiu, X. Li, Y. Feng, Y. Yang, and C. Jiang, “Physgaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynam-ics,” 2024. [10] K. Liu, F. Zhan, M. Xu, C. Theobalt, L. Shao, and S. Lu, “Stylegaus-sian: Instant 3d style transfer with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07807 , 2024. [11] D. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y.-J. Yuan, F.-L. Zhang, Z. He, S. Shan, and L. Gao, “Stylizedgs: Controllable stylization for 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05220 , 2024. [12] B. Gong, Y. Wang, X. Han, and Q. Dou, “Recolornerf: Layer decom-posed radiance fields for efficient color editing of 3d scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07958 , 2023. [13] Z. Kuang, F. Luan, S. Bi, Z. Shu, G. Wetzstein, and K. Sunkavalli, “Palettenerf: Palette-based appearance editing of neural radiance fields,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 20 691–20 700. [14] J.-H. Lee and D.-S. Kim, “Ice-nerf: Interactive color editing of nerfs via decomposition-aware weight optimization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Oc-tober 2023, pp. 3491–3501. [15] A. Mazzucchelli, A. Garcia-Garcia, E. Garces, F. Rivas-Manzaneque, F. Moreno-Noguer, and A. Penate-Sanchez, “Irene: Instant recoloring of neural radiance fields,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2024. [16] B. Wang, N. S. Dutt, and N. J. Mitra, “Proteusnerf: Fast lightweight nerf editing using 3d-aware image context,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09965 , 2023. [17] M. Gross and H. Pfister, Point-based graphics . Elsevier, 2011. 14 

[18] M. Zwicker, M. Pauly, O. Knoll, and M. Gross, “Pointshop 3d: An interactive system for point-based surface editing,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 322–329, 2002. [19] Y. Ohtake, A. Belyaev, M. Alexa, G. Turk, and H.-P. Seidel, “Multi-level partition of unity implicits,” in Acm Siggraph 2005 Courses , 2005, pp. 173–es. [20] S. M. Seitz, B. Curless, J. Diebel, D. Scharstein, and R. Szeliski, “A comparison and evaluation of multi-view stereo reconstruction al-gorithms,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , vol. 1. IEEE, 2006, pp. 519– 528. [21] T. Thonat, E. Shechtman, S. Paris, and G. Drettakis, “Multi-view inpainting for image-based scene editing and rendering,” in 2016 Fourth International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 351– 359. [22] S.-H. Baek, I. Choi, and M. H. Kim, “Multiview image completion with space structure propagation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016, pp. 488–496. [23] N. Snavely, S. M. Seitz, and R. Szeliski, “Photo tourism: exploring photo collections in 3d,” in ACM siggraph 2006 papers , 2006, pp. 835–846. [24] G. Chaurasia, S. Duchene, O. Sorkine-Hornung, and G. Drettakis, “Depth synthesis and local warps for plausible image-based navigation,” 

ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1–12, 2013. [25] Z. Yang, X. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Jiao, Y. Zhang, and X. Jin, “Deformable 3d gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [26] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and W. Xinggang, “4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [27] D. Das, C. Wewer, R. Yunus, E. Ilg, and J. E. Lenssen, “Neural parametric gaussians for monocular non-rigid object reconstruction,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [28] Y. Lin, Z. Dai, S. Zhu, and Y. Yao, “Gaussian-flow: 4d reconstruction with dynamic 3d gaussian particle,” in The IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [29] Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Li, and Y. Xu, “Spacetime gaussian feature splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [30] J. Sun, H. Jiao, G. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Zhao, and W. Xing, “3dgstream: On-the-fly training of 3d gaussians for efficient streaming of photo-realistic free-viewpoint videos,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [31] Z. Li, Z. Zheng, L. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Animatable gaussians: Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps for high-fidelity human avatar modeling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [32] M. Kocabas, R. Chang, J. Gabriel, O. Tuzel, and A. Ranjan, “Hugs: Human gaussian splats,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [33] R. Abdal, W. Yifan, Z. Shi, Y. Xu, R. Po, Z. Kuang, Q. Chen, D.-Y. Yeung, and G. Wetzstein, “Gaussian shell maps for efficient 3d human generation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [34] S. Zheng, B. Zhou, R. Shao, B. Liu, S. Zhang, L. Nie, and Y. Liu, “Gps-gaussian: Generalizable pixel-wise 3d gaussian splatting for real-time human novel view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [35] L. Hu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Zhou, B. Liu, S. Zhang, and L. Nie, “Gaussianavatar: Towards realistic human avatar modeling from a sin-gle video via animatable 3d gaussians,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [36] J. Xiang, X. Gao, Y. Guo, and J. Zhang, “Flashavatar: High-fidelity head avatar with efficient gaussian embedding,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [37] H. Pang, H. Zhu, A. Kortylewski, C. Theobalt, and M. Habermann, “Ash: Animatable gaussian splats for efficient and photoreal human rendering,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [38] Z. Qian, S. Wang, M. Mihajlovic, A. Geiger, and S. Tang, “3dgs-avatar: Animatable avatars via deformable 3d gaussian splatting,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [39] Y. Yuan, X. Li, Y. Huang, S. De Mello, K. Nagano, J. Kautz, and U. Iqbal, “Gavatar: Animatable 3d gaussian avatars with implicit mesh learning,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [40] B. Kerbl, A. Meuleman, G. Kopanas, M. Wimmer, A. Lanvin, and G. Drettakis, “A hierarchical 3d gaussian representation for real-time rendering of very large datasets,” ACM Transactions on Graphics ,vol. 44, no. 3, 2024. [41] Z. Fan, K. Wang, K. Wen, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, and Z. Wang, “Lightgaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and 200+ fps,” 2023. [42] K. Navaneet, K. P. Meibodi, S. A. Koohpayegani, and H. Pirsiavash, “Compact3d: Compressing gaussian splat radiance field models with vector quantization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18159 , 2023. [43] W. Morgenstern, F. Barthel, A. Hilsmann, and P. Eisert, “Compact 3d scene representation via self-organizing gaussian grids,” 2023. [44] S. Niedermayr, J. Stumpfegger, and R. Westermann, “Compressed 3d gaussian splatting for accelerated novel view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024. [45] J. C. Lee, D. Rho, X. Sun, J. H. Ko, and E. Park, “Compact 3d gaussian representation for radiance field,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2024. [46] D. Verbin, P. Hedman, B. Mildenhall, T. Zickler, J. T. Barron, and P. P. Srinivasan, “Ref-nerf: Structured view-dependent appearance for neural radiance fields,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 5481–5490. [47] T. Wu, J.-M. Sun, Y.-K. Lai, and L. Gao, “De-nerf: Decoupled neural ra-diance fields for view-consistent appearance editing and high-frequency environmental relighting,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 conference pro-ceedings , 2023, pp. 1–11. [48] J. Zhang, Y. Yao, S. Li, J. Liu, T. Fang, D. McKinnon, Y. Tsin, and L. Quan, “Neilf++: Inter-reflectable light fields for geometry and material estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 3601–3610. [49] H. Wu, Z. Hu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Fan, and X. Yu, “Nefii: Inverse render-ing for reflectance decomposition with near-field indirect illumination,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023, pp. 4295–4304. [50] S. Wu, S. Basu, T. Broedermann, L. Van Gool, and C. Sakaridis, “Pbr-nerf: Inverse rendering with physics-based neural fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09680 , 2024. [51] Z. Liang, Q. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. Shan, and K. Jia, “Gs-ir: 3d gaussian splatting for inverse rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 21 644– 21 653. [52] S. Lai, L. Huang, J. Guo, K. Cheng, B. Pan, X. Long, J. Lyu, C. Lv, and Y. Guo, “Glossygs: Inverse rendering of glossy objects with 3d gaussian splatting,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ,2025. [53] Y. Shi, Y. Wu, C. Wu, X. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Feng, J. Zhang, B. Zhou, E. Ding, and J. Wang, “Gir: 3d gaussian inverse rendering for relightable scene factorization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05133 , 2023. [54] K. Ye, Q. Hou, and K. Zhou, “3d gaussian splatting with deferred reflection,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024, pp. 1– 10. [55] Y. Endo, S. Iizuka, Y. Kanamori, and J. Mitani, “Deepprop: Extracting deep features from a single image for edit propagation,” in Computer Graphics Forum , vol. 35, no. 2. Wiley Online Library, 2016, pp. 189– 201. [56] X. An and F. Pellacini, “Appprop: all-pairs appearance-space edit propagation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1–9, 2008. [57] X. Chen, D. Zou, Q. Zhao, and P. Tan, “Manifold preserving edit propagation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1–7, 2012. [58] “Scribbleboost: Adding classification to edge-aware interpolation of local image and video adjustments,” in Computer Graphics Forum ,vol. 27, no. 4. Wiley Online Library, 2008, pp. 1255–1264. [59] S. Meyer, V. Cornill` ere, A. Djelouah, C. Schroers, and M. Gross, “Deep video color propagation,” in Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, September 3-6, 2018 .British Machine Vision Association (BMVA), 2018. [60] B. Zhang, M. He, J. Liao, P. V. Sander, L. Yuan, A. Bermak, and D. Chen, “Deep exemplar-based video colorization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019, pp. 8052–8061. 15 

[61] H. Chang, O. Fried, Y. Liu, S. DiVerdi, and A. Finkelstein, “Palette-based photo recoloring,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2015. [62] J. Tan, J. Echevarria, and Y. Gingold, “Efficient palette-based decom-position and recoloring of images via rgbxy-space geometry,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1–10, 2018. [63] Z.-J. Du, K.-X. Lei, K. Xu, J. Tan, and Y. Gingold, “Video recoloring via spatial-temporal geometric palettes,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 40, no. 4, Aug. 2021. [64] Z. Chen, F. Wang, and H. Liu, “Text-to-3d using gaussian splatting,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [65] Y. Liang, X. Yang, J. Lin, H. Li, X. Xu, and Y. Chen, “Luciddreamer: Towards high-fidelity text-to-3d generation via interval score matching,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [66] H. Ling, S. W. Kim, A. Torralba, S. Fidler, and K. Kreis, “Align your gaussians: Text-to-4d with dynamic 3d gaussians and composed diffusion models,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [67] Y.-H. Huang, Y.-T. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Lyu, Y.-P. Cao, and X. Qi, “Sc-gs: Sparse-controlled gaussian splatting for editable dynamic scenes,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [68] Y. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Cai, L. Yang, H. Liu, and G. Lin, “Gaussianeditor: Swift and controllable 3d editing with gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [69] H. Yu, J. Julin, Z. A. Milacski, K. Niinuma, and L. A. Jeni, “Cogs: Controllable gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [70] M. Zwicker, H. Pfister, J. Baar, and M. Gross, “Surface splatting,” Pro-ceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Computer Graphics ,vol. 2001, 08 2001. [71] J. T. Barron, B. Mildenhall, D. Verbin, P. P. Srinivasan, and P. Hedman, “Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields,” in Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2022, pp. 5470–5479. [72] S. A. Shafer, “Using color to separate reflection components,” Color Research & Application , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 210–218, 1985. [73] S. Beigpour and J. Van De Weijer, “Object recoloring based on intrinsic image estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . IEEE, 2011, pp. 327–334. [74] M. Pharr, W. Jakob, and G. Humphreys, Physically based rendering: From theory to implementation . MIT Press, 2023. [75] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, R. Ortiz-Cayon, N. K. Kalantari, R. Ra-mamoorthi, R. Ng, and A. Kar, “Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with prescriptive sampling guidelines,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 2019. [76] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Doll´ ar, and R. B. Girshick, “Segment anything,” 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 3992–4003, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257952310 [77] T. Brooks, A. Holynski, and A. A. Efros, “Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions,” in CVPR , 2023.